Boost Your Employee’s Emotional Intelligence in the Age of AI
Move over worker bee, AI won’t steal your jobs; but only push you to be a smarter, more resourceful and self-aware professional. We tell you why EI will be a critical differentiator.
We live in the age of the machines. Gone are the days when machines were distrusted, there were fears of data inaccuracy, inefficiency, and even a sci-fi inspired dystopian takeover. Today, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and automation have found the place across industries and sectors, ranging from personal to professional.
In this emerging landscape, staying relevant is a whole new ballgame for employees. The monotony or the cyclical simplicity of everyday tasks is now over. Professionals must now focus on what AI cannot do: understand, evaluate, appreciate, interact, and bring that vital human factor. Remember, while a machine can perform some necessary tasks, a human being is still most suited to conduct certain critical and ‘intelligence-driven’ jobs such as leadership, crisis management, and talent recognition.
"The technology of the future, led by artificial intelligence and deep learning, will be able to outthink us in many ways," says Ed Hess coauthor of Is the New Smart: Rethinking Human Excellence in the Smart Machine Age. "However, in the coming Smart Machine Age, our emotional intelligence will be the very factor that makes us unique and employable."
Also read: Why soft skills are crucial in the AI era
Over the next decade, these capabilities will define the future of work, and the successful worker. Often, these human skills aren’t considered as important; with professionals choosing to focus on reports and data, rather than human attention, condition, and experience. Let’s begin by offering 3 basic recommendations:
Don’t fight the change. AI is here to stay and will help contain timelines and costs. Instead of being resistant to the technology, embrace change and how it can transform the way you operate.
Look inward. Explore yourself and what is your true potential, like never before. Evaluate your strengths and weaknesses, and come to a natural understanding of what you can do best and what you can do better.
People matter. Don’t hide behind a machine or a report; instead, relate to the people around you, and consider where you can collaborate to create the ‘new’ and the ‘meaningful.’
All of the above recommendations are driven by emotional intelligence (EI). EI is defined as our ability to understand our own emotions, as well as the emotions of the people around us. Individuals with high EI are great readers of emotions and can capture the essence of a moment and its many outcomes.
EI is particularly important for business leaders who deal with people in large numbers, and must motivate, inspire, and drive towards shared goals or targets. Importantly, EI also helps ensure the creation of an inclusive and prejudice-free workplace. How do you boost and endorse EI in your employees?
To begin with, there are several EI tests available online, and it is important to make your employees aware of why EI is needed. Conduct a series of tests, and then commence EI training.
Also read: Psychometric Tests to Identify EI-driven Soft Skills
Training sessions are always advised. These begin a line of self-inquiries: who are you and what makes you happy or sad? What are the goals that drive you? How do you with negative and positive emotions? Do people matter to you, and if they don’t, why is that so?
Consider adopting a solution meant for future-ready skills training, like Harvard ManageMentor® by Harvard Business Publishing Corporate Learning. With their latest update called Spark, this includes training modules on Authenticity, Design Thinking, and Emotional Intelligence, among others.
A great part of EI is our ability to be great listeners. Individuals with high EI are constantly hearing what other people say, hear, or think about an issue. For managers, this is essential, helping build a consistent communication, feedback, and review pathway.
Empathy is at the core of EI. It is our ability to understand the hearts and minds of others and finetune how we converse, assess, and acknowledge them. Training in empathy will help employees foster mutual respect, a zeal for collaboration, and an overarching oneness with the organization.
Also read: Human Empathy is Essential to the Future of Machine-Led Hiring
All of the above can be achieved with consistent training. However, it’s important to remember that EI cannot be cultivated in a quick-fix fashion. It must be nurtured over a period of time, gradually bringing out the best in all of us, while helping us curb what’s negative/ineffective.
In conversation with HR Technologiest, Greg Jakacki, CEO at Codility said, “Effectively merging human empathy with efficient machines will ultimately revolutionize HR processes. Recruiter demand will increase along with the shift in the way people work, which is diverging from life-long stable employment in favor of short-term contracts.” In this time of AI and Automation, new tools will continually replace what was the definition of hard work and difficult labor.
What will remain are the true reigns of human society and civilisation: our ability to envision new vistas, chalk new vistas, and build greater harmony among each other.
