Millennials And The Resurgence Of Emotional Intelligence
When you control how money is spent, you effectively control the world. And by 2020, millennials will represent 30% of all dollars spent annually in the U.S., or $1.4 trillion.One of the ways millennials are causing a fundamental shift in priorities is their emerging focus on responsibility and mindfulness. Millennials recognize that we have a responsibility first to each other and second to ourselves.
What it takes to be a global citizen — to be socially aware, informed, productive, rational and inquisitive — has emerged as a major plank in the average millennial’s worldview. We call this “emotional intelligence,” and it’s fundamentally changing what it means to be an employee, a leader and a citizen.
Emotional Intelligence: A Primer
At its most basic, emotional intelligence is a person’s ability to detect and recognize their own feelings and the feelings of others and respond to them in a rational way. It’s an awareness of the world around us, as well as the world inside our own heads.
Opening our eyes and our hearts in this way is something we can’t turn off once we’ve learned how to do it. It will change how you behave, as well as how you react to the behavior of others.
In a sense, it’s a survival mechanism. The animal kingdom is filled with higher-order species whose societies are more social and stable because they look out for each other. Somewhere along the line, human civilization got lost in our own navel-gazing — and as unlikely as it sounds, America’s “most selfish generation ever” is leading the way back.
Value Statements
Millennial professionals are almost relentlessly ambitious. They catch flak for it sometimes — they’re notorious for job-hopping their way toward careers that provide personal meaning and social value — but that focus on constant improvement is forcing us to rethink what’s important in the workplace and beyond.
Early in 2017, the Levo Institute polled millennials on the key elements of their career development, including the factors they credit with their personal growth. About 80% of survey respondents indicated emotional intelligence as something they actively focus on as they develop their careers.
Additionally, a stunning 87% of millennials in that same study revealed a strong connection between their motivation to help the company succeed and the emotional intelligence of that company’s leaders.
If we’ve made the case for bettering our emotional intelligence on a societal level, you might be wondering how somebody might go about practicing what we’re talking about here. Below are a few ideas.
Create A Workplace That Fosters Trust
Trust doesn’t just happen. And when it does, we call it “being gullible.” No — trust is earned, but that can’t happen in an environment that doesn’t value some degree of freedom and autonomy.
Our workplaces must become places where we feel free to pursue the company’s ambitions in a personally relevant way. Everybody’s life is different and everybody has different aptitudes. The modern workplace must allow scheduling flexibility and must allow employees to, within reason, follow their own instincts when it comes to solving problems.
In an environment where a person must choose to uphold their half of a social contract, trust naturally follows. You’re going to encounter some folks who let you down, but trust must start somewhere — and where there’s trust, there’s mutual emotional intelligence.
Commit To Meditation
In case you haven’t noticed, the excitement over meditation that’s been sweeping the Western world for a couple years isn’t letting up — and there’s a very good reason for that. What could be confused for a passing fad here in the states has been a staple of ancient religions for a very, very long time.
Why? Because meditation works.
And it can help you become more emotionally intelligent, too. By forcing yourself to remain in the present for a few moments each day, you can learn to focus your mind more keenly on everything else. With your mind wandering less, you’ll find the quality of your work might improve and you’ll find it easier to relate to the people around you.
Become Involved In The Community
Emotional intelligence is all about contextualizing your experiences in life, putting the highs and lows of your emotions in perspective and using the harder-hitting ones — anger, envy, ambition — sparingly and for pro-social ends.
But to do that, we need a common definition of what “pro-social” even means. If we’re living inside our own heads and never venturing out into the world, we stagnate and our emotional intelligence collectively suffers. We can’t empathize with others. Our personal problems become the world to us, to the detriment of all else.
How do we fix this? It’s shockingly easy: Get out into the world. Volunteer your time and/or money. Visit your family more. Read more books. Simply expose yourself to knowledge and the human condition as often as you possibly can.
Boomers and millennials like to pretend we exist on different planes of reality, but we have so much in common — and so much to learn from one another. Go ahead and ask the oldest person you know how they’ve lived so long and they’ll probably tell you it’s because they lived a rich life in the presence of folks who genuinely cared about them. In general, emotionally intelligent people literally live longer than people who do most of their living inside their own heads.